# Database systems architecture, Data Modelling and ER Models

Data needs to be stored, manipulated, shared and transmitted. 

There are many challenges in buidling effective databases: efficiency, security, scalability, maintainability, availabiltiy, integrity ..etc

We also need to capture the relationships of different data. 

Course Structure 
* Data Modeling and Databse Design 
  * ER Model, ER-to-relational 
  * Relational Model and design theory 
* Database application development 
  * SQL, SQLite, PSql..etc 
* DBMSs (Database Management Systems) 
* Limitations of RDBMS in potential future technology

## The Database System Architecture 

### Client-Server 

DBMS refers to to when ther server and database works together to return client queries. 
Clients: Psql, Python/Psycopg2, Java/JDBC 
Server: Query Engine, Manages the updating and reversing of database actions 
Database: Data stored on a disk

### Non-Client Server 
Sqlite3 is not a a client server. The Client and server is done together. It is widely used due to it's light and simple nature. 
Most popular data system. 

## Data Modelling 


Data modelling is a design process which converts requirements into a data model. 

* describe what information is contained within the databse 
* describe relationships 
* describe contraints

Logical Data models - Abstract for conception design (E.g. ER) It can be used to communicate between teams as the diagram is unique and easily understood. 
Phyisical Data model - Record based for implementation 

First we create a logical model and then move to creating a physical modal. 

### Entity-Relationship (ER) Data Modelling 
ER has 3 major modelling contructs: attribute, entity, relationship.
It is modelled using an ER diagram, which is: 
* a collection of entity set definitions 
* a collection of relationship set definitions 
* attributes associated with entity and relatiosnhip sets 
* connections between entity and relationship sets
 
Specifics 
* Entites are rectangles 
* relationships are diamonds 
* attributes are circles 
* thick line (total 1+) means many to many and is required 
* thin line (partial 0+) means not required 
* arror points towards the item that has many of the other
* Composite attributes are attributes which have further attributes 
* Multivallued attributes can have more than one value 
* Derived attribute is optained from another attributes 
* Superkey: (underlined) any set of attributes whose values are distinct over entity set 
* Candidate key: minimal superkey 
* Primary key: candidate key chosen by designer 
* Degree: # entities involved
* Cardinality: # associacted enities   
* Weak entites have no key - they have to be associated with strong entites - indicated with double border for both the relationship an the entity 
* Subclasses indicated by circle relationship with 'o' or 'd'. (overlapping or disjoint) Subclasses can also be total or partial 
## ER-to-SQL Mapping 

Mapping the design into code. 
